W-19473121-hsa-component-partial-kt (#322)
mulesoft/docs-hosting: hybrid-standalone/modules/ROOT/pages/managing-apps-hybrid-standalone.adoc

= Managing Mule Apps Deployed to Hybrid Standalone Instances

Manage your deployed Mule applications through Runtime Manager's centralized console to control application lifecycle, monitor performance, and maintain operational health across your hybrid standalone instances.

== Overview

> Runtime Manager provides comprehensive application management capabilities for Mule applications deployed to hybrid standalone instances, enabling you to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runtime Manager provides comprehensive application management capabilities for Mule applications deployed to hybrid standalone instances. You can:
```

> * Monitor application health and performance metrics in real-time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Monitor application health and performance metrics in real time
```

Reviewer: It doesn't have an object it modifies

* Control application lifecycle operations (start, stop, delete, update)
* Manage individual flow states within deployed applications
* Configure application properties and logging settings
* Access detailed application analytics and transaction insights
* Perform application updates and version management

**Application Management Scope**

> This documentation focuses exclusively on managing applications deployed to hybrid standalone instances (individual servers, server groups, and clusters). All management operations are performed through Runtime Manager's web console or REST APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This documentation focuses on managing applications deployed to hybrid standalone instances (individual servers, server groups, and clusters). All management operations are performed through Runtime Manager's web console or REST APIs.
```

> [IMPORTANT]

Reviewer: Consider making this a Considerations or Before You Begin heading.

====

> **Deployment Method Restriction**: When using Runtime Manager to manage your hybrid standalone servers, you can't manually deploy applications directly to the server filesystem. All deployments must go through Runtime Manager to maintain proper application tracking and management capabilities.

Reviewer: Consider omitting "Deployment Method Restriction" if you make the heading change above.

> **Application Discovery**: Manually deployed applications are not auto-discovered by Runtime Manager and will not appear in the management console.

Reviewer: Consider omitting "Application Discovery" if you make the heading change above.

====

== Applications Dashboard

Access comprehensive application information and management controls through the Applications dashboard in Runtime Manager.

=== Dashboard Access

. In Runtime Manager, navigate to the *Applications* tab.
. Select any deployed application to open the application details panel.
. Review application status, deployment information, and available management actions.

image::managing-applications-on-your-own-servers-26ef4.png["Applications dashboard showing deployed applications list"]

=== Dashboard Information

> The application dashboard displays deployment-specific information based on your target infrastructure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application dashboard displays deployment-specific information based on your target infrastructure.
```

**Individual Server Deployments**

* Application status (Running, Stopped, Failed)
* Last modification timestamp
* Deployed application file (JAR/ZIP) with update capability
* Server resource utilization

**Server Group and Cluster Deployments**

* Aggregated application status across all members
* Individual server status within the group or cluster
* Load distribution and member health indicators
* Collective resource consumption metrics

[TIP]

> Click any server name in the deployment panel to access detailed server information and diagnostics. See xref:managing-servers.adoc[Managing Servers] for comprehensive server management guidance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click any server name in the deployment panel to access detailed server information and diagnostics. For comprehensive server management guidance, see xref:managing-servers.adoc[Managing Servers].
```

Reviewer: Put the goal first when possible

=== Application Management Actions

> The dashboard provides access to key management functions through dedicated buttons:

Reviewer: Is "dedicated buttons" essential? Recommend omitting.

**Manage Application**

* Access comprehensive application settings and configuration options
* Review detailed deployment information and runtime parameters
* Configure application properties, logging, and monitoring settings
* Access performance dashboards and metrics analysis

image::managing-applications-on-your-own-servers-b0e6f.png["Manage Application button on application details panel"]

**Insight**

* Analyze transaction-level data for business and technical insights
* Track message flow patterns and performance characteristics
* Investigate errors and performance bottlenecks
* Monitor business process execution and outcomes

image::managing-applications-on-your-own-servers-ba927.png["Insight button for application analytics"]

[NOTE]

> Insight features may have limited availability in Anypoint Platform Private Cloud Edition environments.

Reviewer: This would be good to put in Considerations / Before You Begin.

== Application Settings Management

> Access comprehensive application configuration and monitoring options through the application settings interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access comprehensive application configuration and monitoring options.
```

=== Accessing Application Settings

. Navigate to Runtime Manager and select the *Applications* tab.
. Choose your deployed hybrid standalone application to open the details panel.
. Click *Manage Application* to access the full settings interface.

image::managing-applications-on-your-own-servers-1fd39.png["Application settings interface with configuration tabs"]

=== Settings Interface

> The application settings interface provides access to all dashboard information plus additional management capabilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application settings interface provides access to all dashboard information plus additional management capabilities.
```

**Configuration Tabs**

* **Flow Monitoring**: Individual flow performance and management controls
* **Insight**: Transaction analytics and business process monitoring
* **Alerts History**: Historical record of triggered application alerts
* **Properties**: Application runtime properties and environment variables
* **Logging**: Log level configuration and output management

The *Alerts History* tab provides comprehensive visibility into application monitoring even*ts, including:

* Alert trigger timestamps and conditions
* Alert severity levels and notification status
* Resolution tracking and acknowledgment records
* Performance threshold violations and recovery events

For comprehensive alerting configuration, see xref:creating-alerts-hybrid-apps.adoc[Creating Alerts for Mule Apps Deployed to Hybrid Standalone].

== Flow Management

> Control individual flow states within your deployed applications to enable granular application behavior management and troubleshooting capabilities.

Reviewer: very nice!

=== Flow Management Overview

Runtime Manager provides flow-level control for applications deployed to hybrid standalone instances, enabling you to:

* Start and stop individual flows within running applications
* Override application-defined flow management logic
* Troubleshoot specific integration flows without affecting entire applications
* Implement maintenance workflows for specific business processes

> **Prerequisites**

Reviewer: Should this be Before You Begin?

> * Applications must be deployed to hybrid standalone instances (not available for CloudHub or Runtime Fabric)

Reviewer: applies to CH1.0 and 2.0?

* User account must have *Manage Applications* permission for target applications
* Target applications must be in Running status

=== Flow State Management

**Default Flow Behavior**

All flows within deployed applications start in *Unmanaged* state by default, allowing application logic to control flow activation and deactivation based on business requirements or runtime conditions.

**Start and Stop Flows**

. Navigate to your application settings in Runtime Manager.
. Access the *Flow Monitoring* tab.
. Select one or more flows to manage.
. Use *Start* or *Stop* buttons to control flow states.

image::flow-management-983fd.png["Flow Monitoring tab with Start and Stop flow controls"]

[IMPORTANT]

> Starting a flow activates its processing capability but does not trigger endpoints or initiate message processing. The flow becomes available to process messages when triggered by configured sources.

Reviewer: This would be good to put above the numbered steps, just after Start and Stop Flows heading, so that user knows what to expect. Also, remember to use contractions.

=== Managed vs Unmanaged Flow States

> **Unmanaged State (Default)**

Reviewer: Does this partially duplicate the Default Flow Behavior above? Consider grouping conceptual info.

Flows operate under application control, allowing custom logic within the Mule application to start and stop flows based on:

* Business conditions and requirements
* External system availability
* Scheduled operations and maintenance windows
* Error recovery and failover scenarios

**Managed State (Runtime Manager Control)**

When you manually start or stop a flow, Runtime Manager overrides application logic and enforces the specified state:

* **Active**: Flow remains active regardless of application logic attempts to stop it
* **Inactive**: Flow remains stopped regardless of application logic attempts to start it

**Returning to Unmanaged State**

> Click *Unmanage* for any flow to restore application-controlled behavior and remove Runtime Manager state enforcement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click *Unmanage* to restore application-controlled behavior and remove Runtime Manager state enforcement from a flow.
```

* **Transaction Analytics**: Business process monitoring and message flow analysis  
* **Alert Management**: Proactive notification for application and infrastructure events
* **Log Management**: Centralized logging aggregation and analysis

For detailed monitoring configuration and usage, see xref:monitoring-apps-hybrid-standalone.adoc[Monitoring Mule Apps Deployed to Hybrid Standalone Instances].

== Delete Applications

Remove deployed applications from your hybrid standalone infrastructure through Runtime Manager's application management interface.

**Deletion Requirements**

* **Servers**: Target server must be in Running status
* **Server Groups**: At least one server in the group must be running
* **Clusters**: At least one cluster member must be active and accessible

**Delete Application Process**

. Navigate to the *Applications* tab in Runtime Manager.
. Locate the application you want to remove.
. Click the status dropdown arrow next to the application.
. Select *Delete* from the available actions menu.

image::managing-applications-on-your-own-servers-96463.png["Delete option in application status dropdown menu"]

> [WARNING]

Reviewer: This is essential for user to know before they complete the procedure. Consider relocating to just after the Delete Application Process heading, before numbered steps.

Application deletion is immediate and can't be undone. Ensure you have application backups or source code access before deletion.

== Redeploy Deleted Applications

Runtime Manager implements automatic recovery mechanisms to maintain application deployment consistency across your hybrid standalone infrastructure.

**Manual File System Modifications**

> When application files are manually modified on the server filesystem while Mule runtime is running:

Reviewer: Is filesystem one word? do we use in MS doc?

* Affected applications are automatically undeployed from the local server
* Applications on other servers in groups or clusters remain unaffected
* Only Runtime Manager UI or REST API deletions permanently remove applications

**Runtime Restart Synchronization**

> During Mule runtime restart, Runtime Manager performs automatic synchronization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During Mule runtime restart, Runtime Manager performs automatic synchronization as follows.
```

* Detects applications missing from expected deployment targets
* Automatically redeploys missing applications to restore desired state

> * Applies to individual servers, server groups, and clusters

Reviewer: Applies what? Verb needs an object

* Synchronization occurs only during runtime restart events

**New Server Integration**

When adding servers to existing server groups or clusters:

* Runtime Manager automatically deploys all group/cluster applications to new members
* Deployment occurs regardless of other member availability
* Ensures deployment consistency across all infrastructure components

== Download an Application Archive

Runtime Manager doesn't support downloading the application archive (ZIP or JAR file) from the application *Settings* page for an application deployed to hybrid standalone instances.

> However, you can download the archive using programmatic access methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you can download the archive using these programmatic access methods.
```

* **Runtime Manager REST API**: Use API endpoints to retrieve application artifacts
* **Anypoint CLI**: Download archives through command-line interface tools

For detailed CLI usage, see xref:anypoint-cli::standalone-apps.adoc#runtime-mgr-standalone-application-artifact[Runtime Manager Application Artifacts].

== Download CloudHub 2.0, CloudHub, and Runtime Fabric Application Archives

> For comparison with other deployment targets, applications deployed to CloudHub 2.0, CloudHub, and Runtime Fabric do support direct archive downloads through the Runtime Manager UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications deployed to CloudHub 2.0, CloudHub, and Runtime Fabric support direct archive downloads through the Runtime Manager UI.
```
